---
date: "2019-07-01T00:00:00Z"
external_link: ""
image:
  caption: 'Image credit: [Javier Larroucau](https://www.flickr.com/photos/101226024@N05/9784983475/in/photolist-nPvfen-o6Zxei-2bJh59Y-fUEAFD-kTYRL6-o4XdiQ-2G26F4-2bJh5df-o6G8X8-TGEGAq-penDbL-nPw9Sr-2bJh5gm-3Ubgw-8UBpE3-P59dzv-TGEGrC-eWLP1U-T1e5bA-25FVJnQ-Lj34fm-28rVhcp-9GctuU-88Go8X-2bJh58L-o6TKvG-nPv4js-eWzjye-2cqCEk3-nPvbaE-9G9xSv-nPv99N-2FSYPV-87C8RN-eWLGRN-eWzmoc-eWznJg-HS1osK-eWzjJD-dMS9mE-o6TM8Q-2bJh5bG-ztjTgm-6mbyH8-28rVhLR-nPw5ei-o6ZLmv-o6SXi3-dm1Ajy-28nwMMs)'
  focal_point: Smart
links:
- icon: researchgate
  icon_pack: fab
  name: Follow
  url: https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Francisco_Olivos
#slides: example
summary: Few studies have advanced on the validation of factorial survey on specific populations. In this study, we aim to discuss the feasibility of factorial surveys on children populations by means of examining the consistency of their responses.
tags:
- Papers
title: Measuring Children Beliefs and Judgements with Factorial Surveys
url_code: ""
url_pdf: ""
url_slides: ""
url_video: ""
---


In the last decades, **social sciences have witnessed a rapid growth of the use of factorial surveys to study beliefs and social judgments** (Wallander 2009). They have been applied in different fields and different efforts have been made in its validation (Dülmer 2007; Lang 2018; Liebe et al. 2017; Sauer et al. 2011, 2014). Among those efforts, the discussion of its feasibility in general populations enabled to include them in large scale surveys and answer generalizable questions (Sauer et al. 2011). Besides the interest in developed countries, nowadays their use and validation have been also spread to less developed contexts (Castillo, Olivos, and Azar 2018; Liebe et al. 2017; Mateo Piñones and Valenzuela Carvallo 2017). However, **few studies have advanced on the validation of factorial survey on specific populations** (e.g. Teti et al. 2016), which could challenge this popular method.

**Our research question is motivated by the substantial contribution that factorial surveys could to make children research**. To our knowledge, there are not applications to this subpopulation. Factorial surveys are an experimental tool which allows addressing the endogeneity of beliefs and judgments (Hainmueller, Hopkins, and Yamamoto 2014; Olivos, 2019). Beliefs are organized in an interconnected system. Therefore, the dependency of beliefs difficulties the isolation of causal effects of particular units of the system. By using a factorial survey, we could identify the causal effects of children’s beliefs on their evaluations, judgments or decision-making. Understanding children’s perceptions, beliefs, and opinions provides relevant information about the determinants of their behaviors and decision-making process. It is consistent with the widely accepted idea that children should no longer only be seen, but also heard in child research (Scott 2008). Rational choice theorists suggest that people, including children and adolescents, act in light of beliefs (Breen 1999; Morgan 2005). In late childhood, and depending on the society, children may take different decisions such as sexual initiation, substance use or educational track choice, among others. These decisions are guided by beliefs, dispositions, and preferences. Hence, factorial surveys are a powerful analytic approach to understand the complexity of children beliefs and their decision-making process.  

In a factorial survey module, respondents may rate a sample of fictitious descriptions of persons, situations or institutions called vignettes. The larger the number of vignettes, the higher the cognitive demand of working on this exercise (Auspurg and Hintz 2014; Sauer et al. 2011). It could directly hinder the consistency of responses when evaluating the vignettes. **Thus, in this study, we aim to discuss the feasibility of factorial surveys on children populations by means of examining the consistency of their responses**. Children are seldom included as part of survey samples, mainly because of concerns about the cognitive abilities “to process and respond to structured questions about behavior, perceptions, opinions, and beliefs” (Scott 2008:88). Therefore, this study is an important contribution to the field of survey methodology. 

In addition to the experimental design, **factorial surveys are an indirect questioning method, suitable for measuring sensitive issues** (Auspurg et al. 2015). Instead of asking what people think about a certain dimension, they evaluate it in a fictitious scenario. According to Lusk and Nordwood (2010), the assumption underlying indirect questioning is that when answering direct questions people want to make themselves look good, but they are not concerned with making others look good. For instance, answering the direct question “Are single-parent families happy?” could be affected by the avoidance of socially desirable answers. However, in FSs, we could include “family structure” as a dimension describing a fictitious family and ask about the level of happiness of that family. Studies using factorial survey have been applied to investigate professional judgments about children abuse reducing successfully social desirability (O’Toole et al. 1994, 1999). In the case of research with children, it is particularly challenging because children may report more socially desirable behaviors than other groups (Camerini and Schulz 2018; Havermans, Vanassche, and Matthijs 2015).  By avoiding social desirability, factorial surveys open the black box of children’s thoughts, preferences and dispositions.  

This study uses data from the 2016 Study About Quality of Education from the Perspective of the Key Actors of the System. It comprises a large and representative sample of Chilean students from 5th to 8th grades. The questionnaire sought to understand students’ judgments about instruction quality. In addition to the factorial survey module, we use student’s characteristics and perceived difficulty to identify potential predictors of consistency. The context of the study offers upper-bound conditions for our validation. Chilean students are outperformed by almost all the students of OCDE countries in reading standardized tests. Therefore, **our estimations could be considered as a conservative test. Any study using factorial survey on children populations from more developed countries could consider our findings as a “worse-case scenario”.**

The surveyed students are on average 11.9 years old with a standard deviation of 1.4. As Borgers, de Leeuw and Hox (2000) explain, children at that age could be considered in the development of formal though stage. Cognitive functions such as formal thinking, logic, and negations are well developed, which suggests that they could answer this kind of instruments. Most children in this age can articulate their beliefs and opinions and, with some adaptations, surveys designed for adults could be used with them (Scott 2008). However, children in this stage are highly sensitive to the context. They could easily be distracted during the surveys or being affected by their classmates. Motivation and boredom could also hamper the quality of the data (Borgers et al. 2000; Scott 2008). **Consequently, even though they could possess the enough cognitive abilities, we may evaluate the feasibility of using factorial surveys with children samples.** 

**Coauthor**: *Minhui Liu*, Pan Sutong Shanghai-Hong Kong Economic Policy Research Institute, Lignan University. Email: minhuiliu@ln.edu.hk